.\" portage-ng.1 — manpage for portage-ng
.\" Copyright (c) 2005-2026, Pieter Van den Abeele
.\"
.\" Distributed under the terms of the LICENSE file in the root directory
.\" of this project.
.\"
.TH PORTAGE\-NG 1 "2026-03-09" "portage-ng" "User Commands"
.\"
.SH NAME
portage\-ng \- a Prolog-based package dependency resolver and build system for Gentoo
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B portage\-ng
.RB [ \-\-mode
.IR MODE ]
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RI [ TARGETS .\|.\|.]
.br
.B portage\-ng
.B \-\-mode standalone \-\-shell
.br
.B portage\-ng
.B \-\-sync
.RI [ REPOSITORY .\|.\|.]
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B portage\-ng
is a dependency resolver, planner, and build orchestrator for Gentoo
Linux package trees.
It reads Gentoo ebuild metadata (md5-cache), resolves dependency graphs
using inductive proof search, generates ordered build plans, and
optionally executes them by invoking the standard
.BR ebuild (1)
command.
.PP
The resolver supports the full PMS (Package Manager Specification)
dependency language, including USE-conditional dependencies, slot
operators, blockers, sub-slots, and PDEPEND (post-merge dependencies).
.PP
.B portage\-ng
can operate in several modes: standalone (default, all in-process),
client\-server (distributed proving via Pengines), or as a daemon
serving IPC clients.
.\"
.SH MODES
.TP
.B standalone
Default.  All operations run in a single process.  The knowledge base
is loaded from a QLC-compiled cache on disk.
.TP
.B daemon
Persistent background process serving local IPC clients via a Unix
domain socket.
.TP
.B ipc
Thin IPC client that connects to a running daemon.
.TP
.B server
HTTP/Pengine server for distributed proving across a network.
.TP
.B client
TCP/IP client connecting to a remote server.
.TP
.B worker
Compute node for distributed proving; polls the server for jobs.
.\"
.SH ACTIONS
Actions control what
.B portage\-ng
does with the given targets.  Exactly one action is performed per
invocation.
.SS Dependency resolution (default)
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-merge
Resolve the full dependency closure and print the resulting plan.
This is the default action when no other action flag is given.
Equivalent to Portage's
.BR "emerge \-\-pretend" .
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-update
Update the given targets.  Resolves the full runtime closure and
performs a transactional replace if needed.
.TP
.B \-\-upgrade
Two-phase upgrade: first compute a fresh plan under
.B \-\-emptytree
semantics, then run
.B \-\-depclean
on the real installed graph.
Defaults to
.B @world
when no targets are given.
.SS Building
.TP
.B \-\-build
Build target: resolve the plan, then execute it with live progress
display.  Downloads distfiles, runs ebuild phases, and shows
per-phase status inline.  The plan is saved to
.I Knowledge/resume.pl
so that an interrupted build can be continued with
.BR \-\-resume .
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-resume
Resume a previously interrupted
.B \-\-build
run.  Loads the saved plan from
.I Knowledge/resume.pl
and re-executes only the packages that did not complete
successfully.  The
.B clean
phase is skipped so that ebuild can pick up from the preserved work
directory, avoiding redundant unpack, configure, and compile steps
for the package that failed.  When all remaining packages complete
successfully, the resume state is cleared.  If failures persist, the
state is kept for another
.B \-\-resume
attempt.
.TP
.B \-\-skip " " \fIPACKAGE\fR
Used with
.BR \-\-resume .
Skip the named package instead of re-executing it.
The flag is repeatable: use
.B \-\-skip
once per package.  Additionally, when
.B \-\-resume
is active, positional arguments are interpreted as packages to skip,
so bare names after all flags work too.  This is more flexible than
Portage's
.BR \-\-skipfirst :
instead of always skipping the first failed package, the user names
exactly which packages to skip.
.RS
.PP
Examples (all equivalent):
.nf
\-\-resume \-\-skip dev\-lang/python\-3.12.0 \-\-skip sys\-apps/portage\-2.3.99
\-\-resume dev\-lang/python\-3.12.0 sys\-apps/portage\-2.3.99
.fi
.RE
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-fetchonly
Only download source archives (distfiles) without building.
.TP
.BR \-F ", " \-\-fetch\-all\-uri
Like
.B \-\-fetchonly
but download all files listed in
.B SRC_URI
regardless of the current USE flag configuration.
Useful for mirroring or pre-populating the distfiles directory.
.SS Package management
.TP
.BR \-C ", " \-\-unmerge
Unmerge (remove) the specified packages.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-depclean
Remove packages that are not part of the dependency closure of the
world set or of the given targets.
.TP
.B \-\-deselect
Remove the given targets from the world set without unmerging them.
The packages remain installed but will no longer be pulled in by
.BR "@world" " updates."
.SS Information
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-info
Without arguments, show system information: portage\-ng version,
profile, registered repositories, and world set contents.
With targets, show detailed package metadata (version, slot,
USE flags, dependencies) for each given package.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-search
Search the knowledge base for matching packages using
.I key=value
queries.  See
.B SEARCH SYNTAX
below for details.
.TP
.B \-\-bugs
Print Gentoo Bugzilla bug report drafts for unresolvable
dependencies (domain assumptions) of the given targets.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version information for portage\-ng and all registered
repositories.
.SS Repository management
.TP
.B \-\-sync
Synchronise the portage tree, regenerate the md5-cache, load the
knowledge base, and (in standalone mode) save it to disk.
Optional positional arguments restrict the sync to specific
repository names (e.g.\&
.BR "portage" ", " "overlay" ).
.TP
.B \-\-regen " " [\fIREPOSITORY\fR...]
Regenerate the ebuild metadata cache (md5-cache) on disk without
performing a network sync (no git pull).  This is the equivalent of
running
.BR egencache .
The knowledge base is updated on the next
.B \-\-sync
or restart.  Without arguments, regenerates metadata for all
repositories registered with the knowledge base.  With arguments,
only the named repositories are regenerated.
.TP
.B \-\-metadata
Alias for
.BR \-\-regen .
.TP
.B \-\-list\-sets
List all available package sets (@world, user-defined sets).
.TP
.B \-\-check\-news
Check for and display GLEP 42 news items from the portage
repository's
.I metadata/news/
directory.  Shows title, date, and content for each item.
.TP
.B \-\-graph
Generate dependency graph output.  Accepts sub-commands:
.BR modified ", " full ", " "build modified" ", " "build full" .
.TP
.B \-\-clear
Clear the in-memory knowledge base.
.TP
.B \-\-save
Save the knowledge base to disk (client mode).
.TP
.B \-\-load
Load the knowledge base from disk (client mode).
.TP
.B \-\-shell
Start an interactive Prolog shell with the full portage\-ng
environment loaded.
.\"
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Dependency resolution options
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-ask
Ask for confirmation before proceeding with the merge.
After the plan is displayed, portage\-ng prompts with
.RB \(dq "Would you like to merge these packages? [Yes/No]" \(dq
and waits for user input.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-pretend
Pretend mode.  Show what would be done without making changes.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-deep
Also consider (rebuild) dependencies, not just the direct targets.
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-emptytree
Pretend no other packages are installed when resolving dependencies.
Forces a complete recalculation of the dependency graph.
.TP
.BR \-N ", " \-\-newuse
Include packages whose USE flags or declared IUSE set have changed
since installation.  This is the broader check: it triggers rebuilds
when new flags are added to IUSE even if they default to disabled.
.TP
.BR \-U ", " \-\-changed\-use
Include packages whose effective USE flags have changed since
installation.  Unlike
.BR \-\-newuse ,
this ignores IUSE additions and removals and only triggers a rebuild
when the actual enabled/disabled flag state differs.  This is
the more conservative option.
.TP
.B \-\-changed\-deps
Rebuild packages whose runtime dependencies have changed since
they were installed.
.TP
.B \-\-changed\-slot
Rebuild packages whose SLOT value has changed since installation.
.TP
.B \-\-selective
Do not reinstall packages that are already installed and satisfy
all dependency constraints.  Implied by
.BR \-\-update " and " \-\-newuse .
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-noreplace
Skip packages that are already installed.  Equivalent to
.BR \-\-selective .
.TP
.BR \-O ", " \-\-nodeps
Merge the target without resolving any of its dependencies.
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-onlydeps
Only merge the dependencies of the given targets, not the targets
themselves.
.TP
.B \-\-with\-bdeps " " \fIy\fR|\fIn\fR
Include or exclude build-time dependencies (BDEPEND) from the
dependency graph.  Default:
.BR y .
.TP
.B \-\-with\-test\-deps " " \fIy\fR|\fIn\fR
Include or exclude test dependencies from the dependency graph.
Default:
.BR n .
.TP
.B \-\-dynamic\-deps " " \fIy\fR|\fIn\fR
When
.B y
(default), use dependency information from the repository ebuild
rather than from the installed VDB.  Set to
.B n
to use the dependency information recorded at install time.
.TP
.B \-\-rebuild\-if\-new\-rev
Rebuild installed packages when a newer revision (same version,
higher \-rN) is available in the repository.
.TP
.B \-\-rebuild\-if\-new\-ver
Rebuild installed packages when any newer version is available in
the repository.
.TP
.B \-\-rebuild\-if\-new\-slot
Rebuild packages when slot-operator dependencies have changed.
.TP
.B \-\-rebuild\-if\-unbuilt
Rebuild dependencies of packages that have been rebuilt from source.
.TP
.B \-\-update\-if\-installed
Like
.B \-\-update
but only consider packages that are already installed.
New dependencies that are not yet installed are skipped.
.TP
.B \-\-exclude " " \fIATOM\fR
Exclude the given atom from the merge operation.  Matching packages
will be silently skipped during dependency resolution.
The flag is repeatable: use
.B \-\-exclude
once per atom.
.TP
.BR \-1 ", " \-\-oneshot
Do not add the target packages to the world set.
.TP
.B \-\-select
Add target packages to the world set after merging.  This is the
default behaviour; the explicit flag is provided for symmetry with
.BR \-\-oneshot .
Use
.B \-\-select=n
as an alternative to
.BR \-\-oneshot .
.SS Binary package options
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-usepkg
Use binary packages from
.B PKGDIR
when available.  Falls back to building from source when no suitable
binary package exists.
.TP
.BR \-K ", " \-\-usepkg\-only
Use only binary packages.  If no binary package is available for a
required package, the merge fails instead of building from source.
.TP
.BR \-g ", " \-\-getbinpkg
Download binary packages from a remote binary package host
.RB ( BINHOST )
in addition to using local packages from
.BR PKGDIR .
Typically combined with
.BR \-\-usepkg .
.TP
.BR \-G ", " \-\-getbinpkg\-only
Use only remote binary packages from
.BR BINHOST .
Local binary packages in
.B PKGDIR
are not used and packages are not built from source.
.TP
.B \-\-usepkg\-exclude " " \fIATOM\fR
Exclude the given atom from binary package usage.  Even when
.B \-\-usepkg
is active, matching packages are built from source.
The flag is repeatable.
.TP
.B \-\-usepkg\-include " " \fIATOM\fR
Force binary package usage for the given atom, overriding any
.B \-\-usepkg\-exclude
or general policy.
The flag is repeatable.
.TP
.B \-\-usepkg\-exclude\-live
Do not use binary packages for live ebuilds (version 9999).
Live ebuilds will always be built from source.
.TP
.B \-\-binpkg\-changed\-deps
Ignore binary packages whose dependency tree has changed since
the binary package was built.  Forces a rebuild from source to
ensure current dependencies are used.
.TP
.B \-\-binpkg\-respect\-use
Ignore binary packages whose USE flag configuration does not match
the current system settings.
.TP
.B \-\-rebuilt\-binaries
Replace installed packages with binary packages that have been
rebuilt more recently than the installed version was merged.
.SS Build options
.TP
.BR \-j ", " \-\-jobs " " \fIN\fR
Limit the number of parallel build jobs to
.IR N .
A value of 0 (default) means auto-detect based on the number of CPUs
and available terminal display lines.
.TP
.B \-\-load\-average " " \fIN\fR
Do not start new build jobs while the system's 1-minute load average
exceeds
.IR N .
Workers poll every 5 seconds until the load drops below the
threshold.  A value of 0 (default) disables load-based throttling.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-buildpkg
Create binary packages after building from source.  When active, the
.B package
phase is inserted after
.B install
and before
.B merge
in the ebuild phase sequence, producing a binary package
(.tbz2 / .gpkg) from the build output.
.TP
.BR \-B ", " \-\-buildpkgonly
Like
.B \-\-buildpkg
but do not merge the packages to the live filesystem.  The build
stops after creating the binary package (the
.B merge
phase is omitted).
.TP
.B \-\-fail\-clean
Clean the build directory when a package build fails.  By default,
the build directory is preserved for debugging.  This option is
useful in CI environments or when disk space is limited.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-logs
Show build log file paths in
.B \-\-build
output.
.TP
.B \-\-timeout " " \fISECONDS\fR
Abort proving and planning after
.I SECONDS
seconds.  A value of 0 (default) means no limit.
When used with the wrapper script, also enforces a hard wall-clock
timeout that kills the process group.
.TP
.B \-\-variants " " \fIMODE\fR
Show alternative build plans when combined with
.BR \-\-pretend .
Each variant toggles a single USE flag or dependency branch
choice and re-proves the full dependency tree in a separate
thread.  Variants are proved in parallel.
.RS
.TP
.B none
Do not show variants (default).
.TP
.B auto
Automatically detect impactful USE flags and
.B ||
/
.B ^^
branch choices from the baseline proof (up to 5 each).
.TP
.B all
Explore all USE flags of the target package that gate
at least one dependency (up to 20).
.TP
.I flag1,flag2,...
Explore only the named USE flags.  Each flag is toggled
from its current effective state.
.RE
.SS Plan explanation (requires LLM)
.TP
.B \-\-explain " " \fR[\fIQUESTION\fR]
Ask questions about the build plan using a configured LLM service.
Must be combined with
.BR \-\-pretend .
After the plan is printed, the question is sent to the LLM along with
a comprehensive summary of the plan (packages, actions, USE flags,
dependency chains, and assumptions).
.PP
.RS
Two modes are supported:
.TP
.B Single\-shot
Pass a question as argument:
.B \-\-explain \(dqWhy is dev\-libs/openssl in the plan?\(dq
.br
Prints the answer and exits.
.TP
.B Conversational
Pass
.B \-\-explain
without a question to enter an interactive prompt where follow\-up
questions can be asked.  Type
.B quit
or
.B exit
to leave.
.RE
.PP
Requires LLM modules to be loaded and a valid API key configured
(see
.BR config:llm_api_key/2 ).
If LLM support is not available, a warning is printed instead.
.SS LLM chat (requires LLM)
.TP
.B \-\-llm " " \fR[\fISERVICE\fR]
Start an interactive chat session with a large language model.
If
.I SERVICE
is omitted, the default service configured via
.B config:llm_default/1
is used (typically
.BR claude ).
.PP
.RS
Available services:
.BR claude ", " grok ", " chatgpt ", " gemini ", " ollama .
.PP
The chat session preserves conversation history across turns within
the same session.  Type
.BR quit ", " exit ", or " q
to leave.
.RE
.PP
Requires LLM modules to be loaded and a valid API key for the
chosen service.
.SS Upstream version checking
.TP
.B \-\-upstream
Check whether newer versions of the specified packages are available
upstream.  Queries the Repology API (https://repology.org) to compare
the version in the local portage tree against the latest version known
across distributions.
.PP
.RS
Packages can be specified as positional arguments or, when no arguments
are given, the world set is checked.  For each package the local
version, the upstream version, and whether an update is available are
displayed.
.RE
.SS Snapshot and rollback
.TP
.B \-\-snapshot " " \fR[\fIID\fR]
Record a snapshot before the merge operation begins.  The snapshot
captures the current VDB state (all installed packages), a copy of
the world set, and creates binary packages (quickpkg) of every
package that is about to be replaced.  If
.I ID
is provided, it is used as the snapshot name; otherwise a
timestamp-based ID is generated automatically
.RB ( YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS ).
Disabled by default; can be permanently enabled via
.B config:snapshot_enabled
in the configuration.
.TP
.B \-\-rollback " " \fIID\fR
Roll back to a previously created snapshot.  When combined with
.BR \-\-pretend ,
shows a diff of what changed since the snapshot without making
changes.  Without
.BR \-\-pretend ,
reinstalls the saved binary packages and restores the world set
from the snapshot.
.TP
.B \-\-snapshots
List all available snapshots for the current host, showing the
timestamp, number of packages recorded, and number of binary
packages saved.
.SS Output options
.TP
.BR \-A ", " \-\-alert
Ring the terminal bell (BEL character) when an operation completes
or when user attention is required (e.g.\& the
.B \-\-ask
confirmation prompt).
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable verbose output with additional diagnostic information.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Reduced output.
.TP
.B \-\-color " " \fIy\fR|\fIn\fR
Enable or disable colored output.  When set to
.BR n ,
all ANSI color, background-color and style escape sequences are
suppressed.  Useful for piping output to files or non-color-aware
tools.  Default:
.BR y .
.TP
.B \-\-style " " \fISTYLE\fR
Set the printing style.  One of:
.BR fancy " (default), " column ", or " short .
.TP
.B \-\-read\-news
When used with
.BR \-\-ask ,
display news items before the confirmation prompt.
.TP
.B \-\-ci
CI mode: non-interactive, exit with a nonzero exit code when
the plan contains assumptions (see
.BR "EXIT STATUS" ).
.SS Network options (client/server modes)
.TP
.B \-\-host " " \fIHOSTNAME\fR
Set the server hostname (client mode).
.TP
.B \-\-port " " \fIPORT\fR
Set the server port (client or server mode).  Default: 4000.
.SS Lifecycle options (daemon/server modes)
.TP
.B \-\-background
Fork to background (daemon and server modes).
.TP
.B \-\-status
Check if the daemon or server is running (ipc and client modes).
.TP
.B \-\-cmd " " \fICOMMAND\fR
Send a command to the daemon or server.  Commands:
.BR halt ", " relaunch .
.SS Build prefix
.TP
.B \-\-prefix " " \fIDIR\fR
Set the installation prefix directory.  Default:
.BR / .
.\"
.SH TARGETS
Targets identify which packages to operate on.  Several formats are
supported:
.TP
.I name
Unqualified package name (e.g.\&
.BR vim ).
Resolves to the best visible version.
.TP
.I category/name
Category-qualified name (e.g.\&
.BR app\-editors/vim ).
.TP
.I category/name\-version
Exact version (e.g.\&
.BR app\-editors/vim\-9.1.0 ).
.TP
.I @set
A package set.  Built-in sets include
.B @world
and
.BR @system .
.\"
.SH SEARCH SYNTAX
The
.B \-\-search
flag accepts one or more
.I key=value
arguments that are combined conjunctively (AND).
Each argument has the form
.IR key comparator value .
.SS Search keys
.TP
.B name
Package name (e.g.\&
.BR gcc ", " vim ).
.TP
.B category
Package category (e.g.\&
.BR sys\-devel ", " app\-editors ).
.TP
.B repository
Repository name (e.g.\&
.BR portage ", " guru ).
.TP
.B version
Package version.
.TP
.B eapi
EAPI version number.
.TP
.B slot
Package slot.
.TP
.B subslot
Package sub-slot.
.TP
.B eclass
Inherited eclass name.
.TP
.B eclasses
Inherited eclasses (alternative form).
.TP
.B keywords
Architecture keyword (e.g.\&
.BR amd64 ", " ~amd64 ).
.TP
.B iuse
USE flag, searched with the prefix stripped (e.g.\&
.B X
matches
.BR +X ", " \-X ", and " X ).
.TP
.B download
Source download filename.
.TP
.B masked
Boolean; use
.B masked=true
or
.BR masked=false .
.SS Comparators
.TP
.B =
Exact match.
.TP
.B !=
Not equal.
.TP
.B <
Smaller than (version/eapi).
.TP
.B >
Greater than (version/eapi).
.TP
.B <=
Smaller than or equal (version/eapi).
.TP
.B >=
Greater than or equal (version/eapi).
.TP
.B ~
Fuzzy match (approximate spelling, powered by
.BR dwim_match ).
.TP
.B :=
Wildcard match using
.B *
and
.B ?
glob patterns.
.SS Examples
.TP
.B portage\-ng \-s name=gcc
Find all versions of packages named
.BR gcc .
.TP
.B portage\-ng \-s category=sys\-devel name=gcc
Find gcc in the sys-devel category.
.TP
.B portage\-ng \-s name:=*python*
Find packages with "python" anywhere in the name.
.TP
.B portage\-ng \-s name~gkc
Fuzzy match \(em finds
.B gcc
despite the typo.
.TP
.B portage\-ng \-s iuse=wayland
Find all packages that declare the
.B wayland
USE flag.
.TP
.B portage\-ng \-s keywords=amd64 eapi>=8
Find packages with the
.B amd64
keyword on EAPI 8 or later.
.TP
.B portage\-ng \-s masked=true category=dev\-lang
List masked packages in
.BR dev\-lang .
.TP
.B portage\-ng \-s slot=0 name=python
Find python packages in slot 0.
.\"
.SH EBUILD PHASES
When
.B \-\-build
is active,
.B portage\-ng
executes the following ebuild phases via the
.BR ebuild (1)
command:
.PP
.RS
.B clean \(-> setup \(-> unpack \(-> prepare \(-> configure \(-> compile \(-> test \(-> install \(-> merge
.RE
.PP
When
.B \-\-buildpkg
is also active, the
.B package
phase is inserted between
.B install
and
.BR merge :
.PP
.RS
.B clean \(-> \|.\|.\|. \(-> install \(-> package \(-> merge
.RE
.PP
The
.B merge
phase is a composite operation that internally runs
.BR pkg_preinst ,
merges files to the live filesystem, unmerges the old version (for
updates and downgrades), and runs
.BR pkg_postinst .
.PP
Which phases are actually executed versus stubbed (displayed but
skipped) is controlled by the
.B build_live_phases
configuration directive.
For
.B uninstall
actions, only the
.B unmerge
phase is run.
.PP
When
.B \-\-resume
is active, the
.B clean
phase is omitted so that the work directory from the previous
attempt is preserved.  This allows
.BR ebuild (1)
to pick up from the last completed phase instead of starting over.
.\"
.SH DOWNLOADING
.B portage\-ng
downloads source archives (distfiles) from a local HTTP mirror using
the GLEP\ 75 layout.  When the mirror download fails, it falls back to
the upstream SRC_URI.
.PP
.B mirror://
URIs in SRC_URI are resolved through the portage tree's
.I profiles/thirdpartymirrors
file, which maps mirror names (e.g.\&
.BR gnu ", " cpan ", " gentoo )
to lists of concrete download URLs.
.PP
For live ebuilds (version 9999, inheriting
.BR git\-r3 ),
.B portage\-ng
clones or fetches the upstream git repository into a local bare cache
under
.IR distdir/git3\-src/ ,
with real-time progress display.
.PP
Fetch-restricted ebuilds
.RB ( RESTRICT=fetch )
are detected and reported as requiring manual download.
.\"
.SH CONFIGURATION
.SS Machine-specific configuration
.TP
.I Source/Config/<hostname>.pl
Per-machine configuration: portage tree location, md5-cache path,
VDB path, and repository registration.
.SS Portage configuration
.TP
.I Source/Config/gentoo.pl
Reads standard Gentoo
.I /etc/portage
files:
.BR make.conf ", " package.use ", " package.mask ,
etc.
.SS Build configuration
.TP
.B config:build_live_phases/1
Controls which ebuild phases are actually executed during
.BR \-\-build .
Phases not in this list are stubbed (shown in the display but not
run).
.TP
.B config:mirror_url/1
HTTP base URL of the local distfiles mirror.
.TP
.B config:build_log_dir/1
Directory for build log files.
.\"
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.  The plan was resolved with no assumptions.
.TP
.B 1
The plan was resolved but contains prover cycle-break assumptions
only (dependency cycles that were broken to produce a plan).
.TP
.B 2
The plan contains domain assumptions (e.g.\& missing or non-existent
packages, unresolvable dependencies).
.\"
.SH EXAMPLES
Resolve dependencies for
.B vim
in pretend mode:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-mode standalone \-\-pretend vim
.fi
.RE
.PP
Build
.B irssi
with live progress (oneshot, do not add to world):
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-mode standalone \-\-build \-\-oneshot irssi
.fi
.RE
.PP
Build
.B gcc
and create a binary package:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-mode standalone \-\-build \-\-buildpkg gcc
.fi
.RE
.PP
Resume a previously interrupted build:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-mode standalone \-\-resume
.fi
.RE
.PP
Resume, skipping two packages:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-mode standalone \-\-resume \-\-skip dev\-lang/python\-3.12.0 \-\-skip sys\-apps/portage\-2.3.99
.fi
.RE
.PP
Same, using positional arguments:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-mode standalone \-\-resume dev\-lang/python\-3.12.0 sys\-apps/portage\-2.3.99
.fi
.RE
.PP
Fetch sources only, without building:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-mode standalone \-\-fetchonly firefox
.fi
.RE
.PP
Synchronise the portage tree:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-mode standalone \-\-sync
.fi
.RE
.PP
Start an interactive Prolog shell:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-mode standalone \-\-shell
.fi
.RE
.PP
CI run with 60-second timeout:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-mode standalone \-\-ci \-\-pretend \-\-timeout 60 kde\-apps\-meta
.fi
.RE
.PP
Show variant plans for
.B gtk+
with auto-detected pivot points:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-pretend \-\-variants auto dev\-libs/gtk+
.fi
.RE
.PP
Explore how toggling
.B wayland
and
.B X
affects a plan:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-pretend \-\-variants wayland,X dev\-libs/gtk+
.fi
.RE
.PP
Ask why a package is in the plan:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-pretend \-\-explain "Why is dev\-libs/openssl in the plan?" vim
.fi
.RE
.PP
Interactive plan explanation:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-pretend \-\-explain @world
.fi
.RE
.PP
Merge vim with a snapshot (auto-generated ID):
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-snapshot vim
.fi
.RE
.PP
Merge with a named snapshot:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-snapshot before\-kde\-update \-\-update @world
.fi
.RE
.PP
List available snapshots:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-snapshots
.fi
.RE
.PP
Preview what a rollback would change:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-pretend \-\-rollback 20260309\-143022
.fi
.RE
.PP
Execute a rollback:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-rollback 20260309\-143022
.fi
.RE
.PP
Start a chat session with the default LLM:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-llm
.fi
.RE
.PP
Chat with a specific LLM service:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-llm grok
.fi
.RE
.PP
Check upstream versions for specific packages:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-upstream sys\-apps/portage dev\-lang/python
.fi
.RE
.PP
Check upstream versions for the world set:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-upstream @world
.fi
.RE
.PP
Upgrade the world set:
.PP
.RS
.nf
portage\-ng \-\-mode standalone \-\-upgrade
.fi
.RE
.\"
.SH FILES
.TP
.I portage\-ng.pl
Main entry point and module load graph.
.TP
.I Source/Scripts/Wrapper/portage\-ng\-dev
Development launcher script with timeout and instrumentation support.
.TP
.I Knowledge/kb.qlf
QLC-compiled knowledge base cache (generated by
.BR \-\-sync ).
.TP
.I Knowledge/profile.qlf
Cached profile data (generated by
.BR \-\-sync ).
.TP
.I Source/Config/
Machine-specific and Gentoo configuration files.
.TP
.I Source/Config/Gentoo/
Template files mirroring the
.I /etc/portage
layout.
.\"
.SH ARCHITECTURE
.B portage\-ng
follows a pipeline architecture:
.TP
.B Reader/Parser
Reads ebuild md5-cache files using a PMS-conformant DCG grammar
.RI ( Source/eapi.pl )
and builds Prolog cache facts.
.TP
.B Prover
Performs inductive proof search over the dependency rules to produce
a proof tree, model, constraint set, and trigger map
.RI ( Source/prover.pl ).
.TP
.B Planner
Generates a topologically sorted, wave-based build plan from the
proof
.RI ( Source/planner.pl ).
.TP
.B Scheduler
Post-processes cyclic remainder: SCC decomposition (Kosaraju) and
merge-set computation
.RI ( Source/scheduler.pl ).
.TP
.B Printer
Renders the plan with assumptions and warnings
.RI ( Source/Printer/ ).
.TP
.B Builder
Orchestrates downloads and ebuild phase execution with a job server
.RI ( Source/builder.pl ).
.\"
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PORTAGE_DIR
When set, overrides the default portage tree location for the
.B emerge\-vp
comparison wrapper.
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR emerge (1),
.BR ebuild (1),
.BR ebuild (5),
.BR make.conf (5),
.BR portage (5)
.\"
.SH AUTHORS
Pieter Van den Abeele
.RI < pvdabeel@mac.com >
.\"
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2005\-2026 Pieter Van den Abeele.
.br
Distributed under the terms of the LICENSE file in the project root.
